Karl Marx is widely known as one of the primary critiques of capitalism. Marx examines capitalism use of distribution and commodification of goods, services and labor as inherently alienating and dehumanizing. The large scale effects of capitalism are more visibly known in the industrial revolution. Marx identifies the market system with four main distinguishing features. First, the goods and services, essentially needs of humans, are owned and controlled through private property by the bourgeoisie or capitalists. Also, it is critical to state that labor is also commodified. The second feature specifies that profits are motivation and therefore profit maximization is the goal of the capitalists. Thirdly, expressed through a formula Marx claims that these profits are mostly sourced from the exploitation of labor workers through wages. Lastly, the “free” market follows the law of supply and demand where the price is set by “market value” also known as Adam Smith’s “invisible hand”. Smith claims its function serves to “meet the wider needs of the community by providing consumer, through competitive between produces, with a wide choice of product”. Additionally, it is critical to state that capitalism’s efficacy aligns with classical liberalism political theory. Finally, the maturity of capitalism leads to a greater concentration of wealth; capital accumulation. This fuels the eventual births of oligarchies and monopolies that inherently conceives mass wealth inequality. With these understandings in mind, as stated before, Marx saw capitalism as inherently alienating and dehumanizing. He stated that to be seen as commodity or be the one “commodifying” only created relationships between people to be self-interested and competitive as “each pays heed to himself only, and no one worries about the others’”(Marx ). Additionally, the alienation created caused separation and a lacking sense of community to each other. This lacking sense of need for cooperation (arguably lack of awareness in interdependency) creates a myriad of issues that this analysis will further explore (e.g. Today’s climate change dilemma in which accountability and sense of responsibility is clashing with the effects and creations of capitalism). This analysis will explore some dynamics created with capitalism within the discourse of violence. While there is vast information and other violent “kinetics” existing in our free market economy, not to mention the entire globalized world, this investigation only scrutinizes a sample of what occurs under the economic system in the U.S.. More specifically, after examining the intricacies between violence, power and our economic system, the analysis will delve into an urban crime rates study done by Don Wallace and Drew Humphries and will elaborate on correlating violence and alteration of crime within communities that occurs under the rule of capitalism.Violence as defined by Michel Foucault is specific to what is done to the body as it is “purely [our] biological base of existence” that “has been directly involved in a political field” in which “power relations have an immediate hold upon it; they invest it, mark it, train it, torture it, force it to carry out tasks”. He elaborates “[the] political investment of the body is bound up… with its economic use; it is largely as a force of production that the body is invested with relations of power and domination… its constitution as labour power is possible only if it is caught up in a system of subjection” Foucault identifies that the human body is “both a productive body and a subjected body”. In which, Foucault states that this subjection is “obtained by the instruments of violence”. The laborers of today of which specifically the US, but arguably most of the globalized world today are “bound up”  by the economic system of capitalism. While Foucault constructs a suitable understanding of violence, and for the purposes of refining capitalism as violence and more specifically structural violence, anthropologist Paul Farmer states “Structural violence is violence exerted systematically — that is, indirectly — by everyone who belongs to a certain social order … In short, the concept of structural violence is intended to inform the study of the social machinery of oppression”. Yet, Hannah Arendt would refute these definitions with her own understanding of power and violence. As she states “Power and violence are opposites: where the one rules absolutely, the other is absent. Violence appears where power is in jeopardy, but left to its own course its ends in power’s disappearance… Violence can destroy power; it is utterly incapable of creating it.”. Moreover, Arendt’s understanding of power is useful because capitalism’s creation of alienation and dehumanization designs a commodified “worker”, but no longer a human. Power has been destroyed and violence has replaced it, but only for “the body”. Certainly, this does not apply to the capitalists as most of our society today believe in the intricacies of liberalism. Therefore, while Arendt provides an adequate perspective, it does not accurately demonstrate the present dynamic. Power, violence and structural violence are all apart of the economic system that oppresses all bodies that work for it (this includes the capitalists). The following is a study done by Wallace and Humphries on urban crime and the effects of capital accumulation that provides an intricate tangible example of how capitalism exists within communities. This study focuses on finding causation behind the growing crime rates specifically after the second world war. “Marxists see high urban crime rates… as a consequence of unemployment and underemployment” of which varying employment rates are natural consequences of business cycles. As stated prior, capitalists extract their profits through the exploitation of workers of which Marx calls “surplus value”. The capital accumulates which as stated leads to the growth of wealth that leads capitalists two options; retain the profits and maintain an assumed steady flow of surplus value, or as most do in order to grow and extract further surplus value: invest. In which, “innumerable accumulation cycles contribute daily to the regional and metropolitan investment trends that in turn shape patterns of urban crime”. Historically, urban cities grew and expanded out of the industrial revolution, great migration, and centralization of factories in cities of which many of these cities are in the North. Additionally, “wage scales have been high in the unionized Northeastern and North Central industrial regions than in the Southern and Western peripheral regions, where unions have been weaker”.  In the maturity of capitalism and therefore growth of capital accumulation, industries wanted “to reduce labor strife and to establish greater control over the production process, turn-of-the-century industrialists relocated manufacturing plants in outlying suburban areas”(Braverman, 1974; Gordon 1978). Factories were decentralized and laborers skilled who had accumulated a life of their own were left and “corporate accumulation of these same industries brought administrative headquarters downtown”. While the study focused on effects of accumulation, region, density, police force size, and crime rate of to, the findings established:“In cities that matured as centers of industrial accumulation, high rates of some types of property crime and violence have their origins in individual and destructive aspects of class struggle - those conditioned by central city hardship. Central city hardship reflects the near colonial status of marginalized groups concentrated in ghettos and subjected to racial oppression. We note that Szymanski’s generalization that racial oppression, in dividing the working class, increases the economic exploitation of all workers. Long-term manufacturing job losses marganzlize portions of the urban working class and wherever such losses occur, increase the rates of burglary and auto theft.” It is important to state that these “economic hardships” is poverty. It applies to the poor and the deterioration of these poor communities that have occured is reflected through economic and social decline. In Manning Marable’s How Capitalism Underdeveloped Black America further explores this dynamic in cities in the later  with a focus on racial oppression. Marable identifies the poor and even further marginalization within the working class as the “subproletrians” in which “include both marginal elements of the working class as well as those of whom Marxists have traditionally termed the lumpenproletariat: pimps and prostitutes, small-time criminals, drug dealers and “numbers” runners”. As Marable states “oppressed people learn strategies for survival; if they do not learn, they perish” and so this some communities and individuals were able to persist and thrive in these ways. Marable’s writings give a further perspective on the “street work” and necessity to survive is exercised within a capitalist system in communities. More importantly, because working class families and individuals find this as a solution to adapt to the economic decline in their communities or simply cannot move outside of this community, it exposes them to even further violence as “methods of ‘labor discipline’ invariably include naked force - rape, threats, physical and psychological assaults” existed to maintain illegal businesses. Marable states that “a central focus of subprolearian life is fear” in which “parents who live in innercities are reluctant to send their children several blocks to attend school or play outside after dark because they are afraid they might be harmed”. These are clear effects of how our economic system uses and is able to quickly dispose of its workers due to high demand, but also due to the theory of alienation and dehumanization that Marx provides. To add another layer of perpetual and systemic violence that the free market creates, Foucault identifies the carceral system and delinquency of which urban crime and capital accumulation pertain to.** The carceral system is a punishment that is inherently violent, but for the sake and focus of urban communities, prisons Foucault states “has succeeded extremely well in producing delinquency, a specific type, a politically or economically less dangerous - and, on occasion, usable - for of illegality; in producing delinquents, in an apparently marginal, but in fact centrally supervised milier; in producing the delinquent as a pathological subject”. Criminalization and imprisonment, especially within our political system, secures further marginalization, further poverty and lack of accessibility to resources. Power, violence and structural violence are all inherent in the economic system we participate in today. Capitalism, as critiqued by Marx, keep our communities in vulnerable, violent and oppressive spaces. Capitalism forces us to compete with each other as we are commodified by the system. This dehumanizes us and alienates us from each other. Including the relationship with the people who employ us. Additionally, the maturity of capitalism has proven further escalation of violence that it both subjects and creates as we have seen in the analysis of urban crime and the effects of capital accumulation. Communities are negatively affected as “bodies are used as a political instrument”. When capitalism ritually deprives one, and arguably generationally, of necessities of survival it exposes itself as violent and hindering life itself. Lack of accessibility to get these needs met create a fight for survival. A fight that is brutal and separates us further. 
